Blog post: A closer look at NSA / CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance (#29791)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-10-05-nsa-cisa-hardening.md

---
layout: blog

> title: 'A closer look at NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance'

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
title: A Closer Look at NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance
```

date: 2021-10-05
slug: nsa-cisa-kubernetes-hardening-guidance
---

**Authors:** Jim Angel (Google), Pushkar Joglekar (VMware), and Savitha
Raghunathan (Red Hat)

> > _Disclaimer_: The open source tools listed in this article are to serve as examples only and are in no way a direct recommendation from the Kubernetes community or authors

Author: Any other markdown options to make this stand out from rest of the content?

> > _Disclaimer_: The open source tools listed in this article are to serve as examples only and are in no way a direct recommendation from the Kubernetes community or authors

Reviewer: Try this:
```suggestion
{{% alert title="Disclaimer" %}}
The open source tools listed in this article are to serve as examples only
and are in no way a direct recommendation from the Kubernetes community or authors.
{{% /alert %}}
```

## Background

The National Security Agency (NSA) and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA)
released, "[Kubernetes Hardening Guidance](https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF)"
, on August 3rd, 2021. The guidance details threats to Kubernetes environments
and provides secure configuration guidance to minimize risk.

The following sections of this blog correlate to the sections in the report. 
Any missing sections are skipped because of limited opportunities to add 
anything new to the existing content. 

This blog post is not a substitute for reading the guide. Reading the published 
guidance is recommended before proceeding as the following content is 
complementary.

## Introduction and Threat Model

The key point to recognize here is that the most important threats for NSA /
CISA or in general for the intended audience of this guidance, may be different
from the threats other enterprise users of Kubernetes care about. This section 
is still useful for organizations that care about data, resource theft and 
service unavailability.

> Following three sources of compromises are highlighted in the guidance:

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The guidance highlights the following three sources of compromises:
```
?

(rewording for grammar)

- Supply chain risks
- Malicious threat actors
- Insider Threats (administrators, users, or cloud service providers)

The threat model tries to take a step back and review threats that not only
within the boundary of a Kubernetes Cluster but also include the underlying
infrastructure and surrounding workloads that are not managed by Kubernetes.

For example, when a workload outside the cluster shares the same physical

> network, it has access to kubelet, etcd, controller manager, scheduler and API

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
network, it has access to the kubelet and to control plane components: etcd, controller manager, scheduler and API
```
?

server. Therefore, the guidance recommends having network level isolation
separating Kubernetes clusters from other workloads that do not need connectivity
to Kubernetes control plane nodes. Specifically, scheduler, controller manager,

> etcd only need to be accessible to API server. Any interactions with Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etcd only need to be accessible to the API server. Any interactions with Kubernetes
```

from outside the cluster can happen by providing access to API server port.

List of ports and protocols for each of these components are
defined [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/ports-and-protocols/)

> Special note: kube-scheduler and kube-controller-manager uses different ports than the ones mentioned in the guidance

> [Threat modelling](https://cnsmap.netlify.app/threat-modelling) section

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
The [Threat modelling](https://cnsmap.netlify.app/threat-modelling) section
```

> from [Cloud Native Security Whitepaper + Map](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/tree/main/security-whitepaper)

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
from the CNCF [Cloud Native Security Whitepaper + Map](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/tree/main/security-whitepaper)
```

an attacker, complete control of the worker node, further allowing lateral
movement to other worker or control plane nodes.

Kubernetes 1.22 introduces
an [alpha](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages) [feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/)
that specifically reduces the impact of such a control plane component running
as root user to a non-root user through user namespaces.

Following container runtimes supports user namespaces / rootless mode

1. [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/)
2. [Podman](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2020/09/25/rootless-containers-with-podman-the-basics)

Some distributions that support running in rootless mode:

1. [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/)
2. [k3s](https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/advanced/#running-k3s-with-rootless-mode-experimental)
3. [Usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes)

### Immutable container filesystems

Guide highlights an often overlooked feature `readOnlyRootFileSystem` with a

> working example in Appendix B. This example limits execution and tampering of

Author: I wish the Appendix or any other section in the guidance was linkable, but the original guidance is published in PDF :(

containers at runtime. Any read/write activity can then be limited to few
directories by using `tmpfs` volume mounts.

However, for some applications that modify container filesystem at runtime like 
exploding a WAR or JAR file at container start up could face issues when 
enabling this feature. To avoid this issue, it is important to consider making 
minimal changes to filesystem at runtime when possible.

### Building secure container images

Guidance recommends running a scanner at deploy time as an admission controller,
to prevent vulnerable or misconfigured pods from running in the cluster.
Theoretically, this sounds like a good approach but there are several caveats to
consider before this can be implemented in practice:

- Depending on network bandwidth, available resources and scanner of choice,
  scanning for vulnerabilities for an image can take an indeterminate amount of

>   time. This could lead to slower or unpredictable pod start up times, which

Author: Have been following a convention to use Capital P when referring to Pod API and small p when referring the object / instance as per one of the comments from @sftim

  could result in spikes of unavailability when apps are serving peak load.
- If the policy that allows or denies pod startup is made using incorrect or
  incomplete data it could result in several false positive or false negative
  outcomes like this:
  - Openssl package inside a container image is detected as vulnerable. However,
    the app uses golang native `crypto` package. Therefore, this vulnerability
    is not in the code execution path and as such has minimal impact if it
    remains unfixed
  - A vulnerability is detected in openssl package for a debian base image.
    However, the upstream debian community considers this as a Minor impact
    vulnerability and as a result does not release a patch fix for this

>     vulnerability. Owner of this image is now stuck with a vulnerability that

Reviewer 2: nit pick: `The owner of this image is now stuck with a vulnerability that cannot be fixed`

Information about migrating from pod security policy to built-in pod security
admission feature is available
in [this task page](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/migrate-from-psp/)

One important behavior mentioned in the guidance, that remains the same between
pod security policy and its replacement is that enforcing either of them does
not affect _already_ running pods as the enforcement happens at pod creation
stage.

### Hardening container engines

Some container workloads are less trusted than others but may need to run in the
same cluster. In those cases, running them on dedicated nodes that include
hardened container runtimes that provide stricter pod isolation boundaries can
act as a useful security control.

Kubernetes supports
a [feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/)
called `RuntimeClass` that is stable / GA (enabled by default) stage as of v1.20
to natively support this approach. Some projects that support this feature are:

1. [kata containers](https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/blob/main/docs/how-to/how-to-use-k8s-with-cri-containerd-and-kata.md#create-runtime-class-for-kata-containers)

> 2. [gvisor](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/containerd/quick_start/)

Reviewer 3: And perhaps bullets instead of numbered list to avoid the implied prioritization of an ordered list?

level isolation remains the strictest workload isolation mechanism, inspite of
improvements mentioned earlier here and in the guide.

## Network Separation and Hardening

Kubernetes Networking can be tricky and this section focuses on how to secure
and harden the relevant configurations. The guide identifies the following as key
takeaways: 
- Using network policies to create isolation between resources, 
- Securing control plane
- Encrypting traffic and sensitive data

### Network Policies

Network policies can be created with the help of network plugins. In order to
make the creation and visualization easier for users, Cilium supports
a [web GUI tool](https://editor.cilium.io). It creates Kubernetes Network
policies as well as Cilium Network policies, which can be used to minimize the
attack vector.

Another scenario that is worth exploring is the usage of external IPs. Some
services when misconfigured can create random external IPs. An attacker can take
advantage of this configuration and easily intercept traffic. This vulnerability
has been reported
in [CVE-2020-8554](https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2020-8554/).

> Using [externalip-webhook]([https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/externalip-webhook)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using [externalip-webhook](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/externalip-webhook)
```

can mitigate this vulnerability. It will prevent the services from using random
external IPs. [Webhook](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/externalip-webhook) 

> will only allow creation of services which doesn't require external IP or whose 

Reviewer 2: nit pick: `of services that don't require external IPs or whose external IPs are within the`

external IPs are within the range specified by the administrator.

> CVE-2020-8554 - Kubernetes API server in all versions allow an attacker who is able to create a ClusterIP service and set the spec.externalIPs field, to intercept traffic to that IP address. Additionally, an attacker who is able to patch the status (which is considered a privileged operation and should not typically be granted to users) of a LoadBalancer service can set the status.loadBalancer.ingress.ip to similar effect.

### Resource Policies

In addition to adding Resource Quotas and limits, consider adding PID limits and

> restrictions, to avoid PID exhaustion. More details can be

Reviewer 2: Grammar nit pick: `and restrictions to avoid PID exhaustion`

Reviewer: How about this wording?
```markdown
In addition to configuring ResourceQuotas and limits, consider restricting how many process
IDs (PIDs) a given Pod can use, and also to reserve some PIDs for node-level use.
```
(plus rewording the next sentence)

found [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pid-limiting/).

### Control Plane Hardening

In the next section, the guide covers control plane hardening. It is worth
noting that
from [Kubernetes 1.20](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/91506),
insecure port has been removed.

### Etcd

> As a general thumb of rule, the etcd server should be configured to only trust

Reviewer 2: Nit pick: `As a general rule of thumb`

Reviewer 3: Better to not include "of thumb" at all, as not all readers are hip to that term :)

certs assigned to API server. It limits the attack surface and prevents the
malicious attacker from gaining access to the cluster. It might be beneficial to
use a separate CA for etcd, as it by default trusts all the certificates issued
by root CA.

> ### Kubeconfig Files

Author: Actually, section names are intentional and copied verbatim from the guidance. This was used as a loose pointer to co-relate and locate relevant content in the guidance, because the guidance is published as a PDF and hence each section is un-linkable in a traditional markdown hyperlink fashion.

> ### Kubeconfig Files

Reviewer: You can link to pages at least; most user agents know how to make that work.
For example: https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF#page=20

> ### Kubeconfig Files

Reviewer: Maybe that's useful to add?

In addition to specifying the token and certificates directly, `.kubeconfig`
supports dynamic retrieval of temporary tokens using auth provider plugins.
Beware of the possibility of malicious
shell [code execution](https://banzaicloud.com/blog/kubeconfig-security/) in a
`kubeconfig` file. Once attackers gain access to the cluster, they can steal ssh
keys/secrets or more.

### Secrets

> [External secrets providers](https://github.com/external-secrets/kubernetes-external-secrets)

Reviewer 3: +1 and also are we recommended not to use regular K8s secrets? Because that's what this implies imo.

> [External secrets providers](https://github.com/external-secrets/kubernetes-external-secrets)

Reviewer: I was working on a workload recently that had, designed into it, a “knowing this lets you do anything“ Secret, and I opted not to use a Secret for that because read-back from the API felt a bit too plausible.
I would still use Secret most of the time because it's the API intended for that purpose.

One mechanism that can help there is an external authz webhook that implements deny rules. RBAC as built into Kubernetes only provides additive allow rules. I think that's a lot of detail to mention here though.

> [External secrets providers](https://github.com/external-secrets/kubernetes-external-secrets)

Reviewer 4: Would it make sense to remove this information if it is misleading? The idea was to have supplemental methods /info in addition to what is being mentioned in the guide.

> [External secrets providers](https://github.com/external-secrets/kubernetes-external-secrets)

Author: Added some context that hopefully makes it clear, why and when these alternatives makes sense.

and [csi-secrets-store](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/secrets-store-csi-driver)
can also be used as alternatives to Kubernetes secrets.

## Log Auditing

The report stresses monitoring and alerting based on logs. The key points
include logging at the host level, application level, and on the cloud. When
running kubernetes in production, it's important to understand who's
responsible, and who's accountable, for each layer of logging.

### Kubernetes API auditing

One area that deserves more focus is what exactly should alert or be logged. The
document outlines a sample policy in *Appendix L: Audit Policy* that logs all
RequestResponse's including metadata and request / response bodies. While
helpful for a demo, it may not be practical for production.

Each organization needs to evaluate their
own [threat model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Threat_model) and build an
audit policy that complements or helps troubleshooting incident response. Think
about how someone would attack your organization and what audit trail could
identify it. Review more advanced options for tuning audit logs in

> the [official audit logging documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug-application-cluster/audit/#audit-policy)
> . It's crucial to tune your audit logs to only include events that meet your

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
the official [audit logging documentation](/docs/tasks/debug-application-cluster/audit/#audit-policy).
It's crucial to tune your audit logs to only include events that meet your
```

threat model.

> <!–– IF https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kind/pull/2431 merges... Audit

Reviewer 2: Potentially erroneous: Assume you meant to have this removed?

Reviewer: We can merge this with the comment left in, I think. Would be good to track whether or not to update this article.

logging configurations can also be tested with
kind ([instructions](https://deploy-preview-2431--k8s-kind.netlify.app/docs/user/auditing/))
. ––>

### Streaming logs and auditing

Logging is important for threat and anomaly detection. As the document outlines,
it's a best practice to scan and alert on logs as close to real time as possible
and to protect logs from tampering if a compromise occurs. It's important to
reflect on the various levels of logging and identify the critical areas such as
API endpoints.

> Kubernetes API audit logging can stream to a webhook and there's an example in *
> Appendix N: Webhook configuration*. Using a webhook could be a method that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes API audit logging can invoke a webhook to write batches of events;
there's an example in *Appendix N: Webhook configuration*. Using a webhook
could be a method that
```
This is more like batched writes and not true streaming. You can set batch size == 1.

Reviewer 3: Can we also link "Appendix N: Webhook configuration" to https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF#page=58?

stores logs off cluster and/or centralizes all audit logs. Once logs are
centrally managed, look to enable alerting based on critical events. Also ensure
you understand what the baseline is for normal activities.

### Alert identification

While the guide stressed the importance of notifications, there is not a blanket

> event list to alert from. The alerting requirements vary based on your own

Reviewer 2: Nit pick: `vary based on your requirements`

requirements and threat model. A few examples could be:

> - Changes to SecurityContext of a pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Changes to the `securityContext` of a Pod
```
(writing Pod in title case because here it refers to Pod as the API, not the equivalent thing that runs on a node).

- Updates to admission controller configs
- Accessing certain files / URLs

> > TODO: Can SIG Security recommend a good sample / baseline alert events that we use in all examples moving forward? (maybe a separate issue)

Reviewer 2: Potentially erroneous: Assume you meant to have this removed?

Reviewer: /retitle [WIP] Blog post: A closer look at NSA / CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance

because of the TODO mentioned in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/29791/files#r715134850

@PushkarJ if you address that, please feel to retitle again to mark this as not-draft.

### Additional logging resources

- [Seccomp Security Profiles and You: A Practical Guide - Duffie Cooley](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPuu8wsu2Zc)
- [TGI Kubernetes 119: Gatekeeper and OPA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJgaGJm9NJE)
- [Abusing The Lack of Kubernetes Auditing Policies](https://www.lacework.com/blog/hiding-in-plaintext-sight-abusing-the-lack-of-kubernetes-auditing-policies/)
- [Enable seccomp for all workloads with a new v1.22 alpha feature](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/08/25/seccomp-default/)
- [This Week in Cloud Native: Auditing / Pod Security](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/1147889860)

## Upgrading and Application Security practices

> Kubernetes releases occur frequently and upgrade toil is a common problem for

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
Kubernetes releases three times per year, so upgrade-related toil is a common problem for
```

folks running production clusters. In addition to this, operators must
regularly upgrade the underlying node's operating system and running
applications. This is a best practice to ensure continued support and to reduce
the likelihood of bugs or vulnerabilities.

Kubernetes supports the 3 most recent stable releases. While each Kubernetes
release goes through a massive gauntlet of tests before being published, some
teams aren't comfortable running the latest stable release until some time has

> passed. No matter what version you're running ensure that patch upgrades

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
passed. No matter what version you're running, ensure that patch upgrades
```

happen frequently or automatically. More information can be found in

> the [version skew](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/) policy

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
the [version skew]/releases/version-skew-policy/) policy
```

> docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pages.
```

> When thinking about how you'll manage node OS upgrades, consider ephemeral
> nodes. Having the ability to destroy and add nodes allows your team to respond

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When thinking about how you'll manage node OS upgrades, consider ephemeral
nodes. Having the ability to destroy and add nodes allows your team to respond
```

Do we have a doc for ephemeral nodes? Or is this meant more like "consider making your nodes ephemeral for better responses"?

Reviewer: The [Cloud Native Definition](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/DEFINITION.md) uses the term “immutable infrastructure”; we could emphasize how that implies treating nodes as disposable and fungible (you can replace one node with a different and essential identical new node, with no ill effects).

quicker to node issues. In addition, having deployments that tolerate node

> instability (and a culture that encourages frequent deployments) allows for

Reviewer: It makes sense to me as written. The polar opposite is a culture that prefers to avoid change until there is so much batched up that deploying it becomes unavoidable.

easier cluster upgrades.

> Additionally, its worth reiterating from the guidance that periodic 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, it's worth reiterating from the guidance that periodic 
```

vulnerability scans and penetration tests can be performed on the various system
components to proactively look for insecure configurations and 
zero-day vulnerabilities.

### Finding release & security information

> To find the most recent OSS Kubernetes supported versions, check out

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To find the most recent Kubernetes supported versions, refer to
```
I don't think we need to call Kubernetes "OSS Kubernetes" in a blog post _by_ OSS Kubernetes

> `k8s.io/releases` which includes minor versions. It's good to stay up to date with

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
[https://k8s.io/releases](https://k8s.io/releases), which includes minor versions. It's good to stay up to date with
```
?

your minor version patches.

If you're running a managed Kubernetes offering, look for their release
documentation and find their various security channels.

Subscribe to

> the [Kubernetes Announce mailing list](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-announce)
> . The Kubernetes Announce mailing list is searchable for terms such

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
the [Kubernetes Announce mailing list](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-announce).
The Kubernetes Announce mailing list is searchable for terms such
```

> as "[Security Advisories](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-announce/search?q=%5BSecurity%20Advisory%5D)"
> . Alerts and email notifications can be created as long as you know what key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as "[Security Advisories](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-announce/search?q=%5BSecurity%20Advisory%5D)".
You can set up alerts and email notifications as long as you know what key
```

words to alert on.

## Conclusion

> In summary, it is fantastic to see security focussed practitioners sharing this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In summary, it is fantastic to see security practitioners sharing this
```

level of detailed guidance in public. This guidance further highlights
Kubernetes going mainstream and how securing Kubernetes clusters and the

> application containers running on it, continues to need attention and focus of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
application containers running on Kubernetes continues to need attention and focus of
```

> practitioners. Few weeks after the guidance was published, an open source

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
practitioners. Only a few weeks after the guidance was published, an open source
```

tool [kubescape](https://github.com/armosec/kubescape) to validate cluster
against this guidance became available.

This tool can be a great starting point to check the current state of your

> clusters and then use the information in this blog and the guidance to assess 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
clusters, after which you can use the information in this blog post and in the guidance to assess 
```

where improvements can be made.

> At the end, it is worth re-iterating that not all controls in this guidance will
> make sense for all practitioners. The best way to know which controls matter is
> to rely on the threat model of your own Kubernetes environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, it is worth reiterating that not all controls in this guidance will
make sense for all practitioners. The best way to know which controls matter is
to rely on the threat model of your own Kubernetes environment.
```

> > Shoutout and thanks to Rory McCune (@raesene) for his inputs to this blog post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A special shout out and thanks to Rory McCune (@raesene) for his inputs to this blog post_
```
(content is not a quote)

---
layout: blog
title: A Closer Look at NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance
date: 2021-10-05
slug: nsa-cisa-kubernetes-hardening-guidance
---

**Authors:** Jim Angel (Google), Pushkar Joglekar (VMware), and Savitha
Raghunathan (Red Hat)

> _Disclaimer_: The open source tools listed in this article serve as examples only and are in no way a direct recommendation from the Kubernetes community or authors

## Background

USA's National Security Agency (NSA) and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA)

> released, "[Kubernetes Hardening Guidance](https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF)"

Reviewer: (only a nit)
```suggestion
released their report
"[Kubernetes Hardening Guidance](https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF)"
```

The report stresses monitoring and alerting based on logs. The key points
include logging at the host level, application level, and on the cloud. When
running Kubernetes in production, it's important to understand who's
responsible, and who's accountable, for each layer of logging.

### Kubernetes API auditing

One area that deserves more focus is what exactly should alert or be logged. The
document outlines a sample policy in *Appendix L: Audit Policy* that logs all
RequestResponse's including metadata and request / response bodies. While
helpful for a demo, it may not be practical for production.

Each organization needs to evaluate their
own [threat model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Threat_model) and build an
audit policy that complements or helps troubleshooting incident response. Think
about how someone would attack your organization and what audit trail could
identify it. Review more advanced options for tuning audit logs in
the official [audit logging documentation](/docs/tasks/debug-application-cluster/audit/#audit-policy).
It's crucial to tune your audit logs to only include events that meet your
threat model.

Audit logging configurations can also be tested with

> kind following these ([instructions](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/auditing).

Reviewer: (nit, sorry)
```suggestion
kind following these [instructions](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/auditing).
```

as "[Security Advisories](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-announce/search?q=%5BSecurity%20Advisory%5D)".
You can set up alerts and email notifications as long as you know what key
words to alert on.

## Conclusion

In summary, it is fantastic to see security practitioners sharing this
level of detailed guidance in public. This guidance further highlights
Kubernetes going mainstream and how securing Kubernetes clusters and the
application containers running on Kubernetes continues to need attention and focus of
practitioners. Only a few weeks after the guidance was published, an open source
tool [kubescape](https://github.com/armosec/kubescape) to validate cluster
against this guidance became available.

This tool can be a great starting point to check the current state of your
clusters, after which you can use the information in this blog post and in the guidance to assess 
where improvements can be made.

Finally, it is worth reiterating that not all controls in this guidance will
make sense for all practitioners. The best way to know which controls matter is
to rely on the threat model of your own Kubernetes environment.

> A special shout out and thanks to Rory McCune (@raesene) for his inputs to this blog post_

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
_A special shout out and thanks to Rory McCune (@raesene) for his inputs to this blog post._
```

1. Pods can fail to start, if the user defined at build time is different from
   the one defined in pod spec and some files are as a result inaccessible.
2. Pods can end up sharing User IDs unintentionally. This can be problematic
   even if the User IDs are non-zero in a situation where a container escape to
   host file system is possible. Once the attacker has access to the host file
   system, they get access to all the file resources that are owned by other
   unrelated pods that share the same UID.
3. Pods can end up sharing User IDs, with other node level processes not managed
   by Kubernetes e.g. node level daemons for auditing, vulnerability scanning,
   telemetry. The threat is similar to the one above where host file system
   access can give attacker full access to these node level daemons without
   needing to be root on the node.

However, none of these cases will have as severe an impact as a container
running as root being able to escape as a root user on the host, which can provide 
an attacker with complete control of the worker node, further allowing lateral
movement to other worker or control plane nodes.

Kubernetes 1.22 introduced

> an [alpha](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages) [feature](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/)

Reviewer 5: Just a very small nit; as I read the blog from the netlify preview, since each word in `alpha feature` is hyperlinked, it's not easily discernible by the reader that each word goes to a different link. Maybe just have `alpha feature` link to `/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/`
```suggestion
an [alpha feature](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/)
```

that specifically reduces the impact of such a control plane component running
as root user to a non-root user through user namespaces.

> That (alpha stage) support for user namespaces / rootless mode is available with

Reviewer 5: As a follow-up to my [nit above](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/29791/files#r716869055); move the link to `featuregates/#feature-stages` to this line

```suggestion
That ([alpha stage](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages)) support for user namespaces / rootless mode is available with
```

---
layout: blog
title: A Closer Look at NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance
date: 2021-10-05
slug: nsa-cisa-kubernetes-hardening-guidance
---

**Authors:** Jim Angel (Google), Pushkar Joglekar (VMware), and Savitha
Raghunathan (Red Hat)

> {{% alert title="Disclaimer" %}}

Author: @sftim Did I do this correctly?

Reviewer: Looks great!

---
layout: blog
title: A Closer Look at NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance
date: 2021-10-05
slug: nsa-cisa-kubernetes-hardening-guidance
---

**Authors:** Jim Angel (Google), Pushkar Joglekar (VMware), and Savitha
Raghunathan (Red Hat)

> _Disclaimer_: The open source tools listed in this article are to serve as examples only and are in no way a direct recommendation from the Kubernetes community or authors

## Background

The National Security Agency (NSA) and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA)
released, "[Kubernetes Hardening Guidance](https://media.defense.gov/2021/Aug/03/2002820425/-1/-1/1/CTR_KUBERNETES%20HARDENING%20GUIDANCE.PDF)"
on August 3rd, 2021. The guidance details threats to Kubernetes environments
and provides secure configuration guidance to minimize risk.

> The following sections of this blog correlate to the sections in the report. 

Reviewer 6: Is report the right term? 
```suggestion
The following sections of this blog correlate to the sections in the NSA/CISA guidance. 
```

running as root being able to escape as root user on the host which can provide 
an attacker, complete control of the worker node, further allowing lateral
movement to other worker or control plane nodes.

Kubernetes 1.22 introduced
an [alpha](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages) [feature](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/)
that specifically reduces the impact of such a control plane component running
as root user to a non-root user through user namespaces.

That (alpha stage) support for user namespaces / rootless mode is available with
the following container runtimes:

1. [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/)
2. [Podman](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2020/09/25/rootless-containers-with-podman-the-basics)

Some distributions that support running in rootless mode:

1. [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/)
2. [k3s](https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/advanced/#running-k3s-with-rootless-mode-experimental)
3. [Usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes)

### Immutable container filesystems

> The Kubernetes Hardening Guidance report highlights an often overlooked feature `readOnlyRootFileSystem`, with a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The NSA/CISA Kubernetes Hardening Guidance highlights an often overlooked feature `readOnlyRootFileSystem`, with a
```

    the application is written in Golang and uses the Go `crypto` package for TLS. Therefore, this vulnerability
    is not in the code execution path and as such has minimal impact if it
    remains unfixed
  - A vulnerability is detected in the `openssl` package for a Debian base image.
    However, the upstream Debian community considers this as a Minor impact
    vulnerability and as a result does not release a patch fix for this
    vulnerability. Owner of this image is now stuck with a vulnerability that
    can not be fixed and a cluster that does not allow the image to run because
    of predefined policy that does not take into account whether the fix for a
    vulnerability is available or not
  - A Golang app is built on top of a [distroless](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless)
    image, but it is compiled with a Golang version that uses a vulnerable [standard library](https://pkg.go.dev/std).
    The scanner has
    no visibility into golang version but only on OS level packages. So it 
    allows the pod to run in the cluster in spite of the image containing an 
    app binary built on vulnerable golang.

> To be clear, relying on vulnerability scanners is absolutely a good idea but

Reviewer 6: Suggest dropping the "To be clear" verbiage, it doesn't convey anything in particular
```suggestion
Relying on vulnerability scanners is absolutely a good idea but
```

policy definitions should be flexible enough to allow:

- Creation of exception lists for images or vulnerabilities through labelling

> - Overriding the severity with a risk score based on impact of a vulnerability

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Rescoring the severity of a vulnerability based on the specifics of your environment
```

### Pod Security Policies

Since Kubernetes v1.21, Pod Security Policy feature is deprecated but some of
guidance in this section will still apply, for next few years as end users
upgrade their clusters to newer Kubernetes versions. For historical context and
what to expect, on pod security policy and its deprecation, please refer to this
excellent [blog post](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/04/06/podsecuritypolicy-deprecation-past-present-and-future/)
.

The Kubernetes project is working on a replacement for PodSecurityPolicy.
Kubernetes v1.22 includes an alpha feature called called [Pod Security Admission](/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/)
that is intended to allow enforcing a minimum level of isolation between pods.

The built-in isolation levels for Pod Security Admission are derived
from [Pod Security Standards](/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/), a superset of all the components mentioned in Table I (page 10) of
from [Pod Security Standards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages)
, which is a superset of all the components mentioned in Table I (page 10) of
the guidance.

> Information about migrating from PodSecurityPolicy to the pod security

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Information about migrating from PodSecurityPolicy to the Pod Security
```

> admission feature is available

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Admission feature is available
```

the enforcement happens during the pod creation
stage.

### Hardening container engines

Some container workloads are less trusted than others but may need to run in the
same cluster. In those cases, running them on dedicated nodes that include
hardened container runtimes that provide stricter pod isolation boundaries can
act as a useful security control.

Kubernetes supports
an API called [RuntimeClass](/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/) that is
stable / GA (and, therefore, enabled by default) stage as of Kubernetes v1.20.
RuntimeClass allows you to ensure that Pods requiring strong isolation are scheduled onto
nodes that can offer it.

Some third-party projects that you can use in conjunction with RuntimeClass are:

1. [kata containers](https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/blob/main/docs/how-to/how-to-use-k8s-with-cri-containerd-and-kata.md#create-runtime-class-for-kata-containers)
2. [gvisor](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/containerd/quick_start/)

As discussed here and in the guidance, many features and tooling in and around
Kubernetes tooling exists that can enhance the isolation boundaries between two

> pods. Based on relevant threats and risk posture, users should pick and choose

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There are many Kubernetes features and ecosystem tools that can enhance the isolation boundaries between pods. Based on relevant threats and risk posture, users should pick and choose
```

noting that
from [Kubernetes 1.20](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/91506),
insecure port has been removed.

### etcd

As a general thumb of rule, the etcd server should be configured to only trust
certs assigned to API server. It limits the attack surface and prevents the
malicious attacker from gaining access to the cluster. It might be beneficial to
use a separate CA for etcd, as it by default trusts all the certificates issued
by root CA.

### Kubeconfig Files

In addition to specifying the token and certificates directly, `.kubeconfig`
supports dynamic retrieval of temporary tokens using auth provider plugins.
Beware of the possibility of malicious
shell [code execution](https://banzaicloud.com/blog/kubeconfig-security/) in a
`kubeconfig` file. Once attackers gain access to the cluster, they can steal ssh
keys/secrets or more.

### Secrets

[External secrets providers](https://github.com/external-secrets/kubernetes-external-secrets)
and [csi-secrets-store](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/secrets-store-csi-driver)
can also be used as alternatives to Kubernetes [Secrets](/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/).

## Log Auditing

> The report stresses monitoring and alerting based on logs. The key points

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The NSA/CISA guidance stresses monitoring and alerting based on logs. The key points
```
